# Getting started

## Connecting to a database

### Postgres 
```python
from p3orm import postgres

db = postgres()

await db.connect("postgresql://user:pass@host:port")

# or

await db.connect(user=..., password=..., database=..., host=..., port=...)

db.is_connected() # False
```

### SQLite
```python
from p3orm import sqlite

db = sqlite()
await db.connect(":memory:")
```

## Disconnecting
### Postgres
```python
await postgres().disconnect()

postgres().is_connected() # False
```
### SQLite
```python
await sqlite().disconnect()
```

p3orm currently allows you to connect to a single database within a process. You can fetch the Postgres driver with `postgres()` from `p3orm.core` and the SQLite driver with `sqlite()` from `p3orm.core`.

---

## Defining models
```python
from datetime import datetime

from p3orm import Table, Column

class Thing(Table):
  __tablename__ = "thing"

  id = Column(int, autogen=True)
  name = Column(Optional[str])
  created_at = Column(datetime, autogen=True)
```

### Column parameters
- `_type`: Specifies the type of the column, will be used to convert between Python and Postgres. This also generates the type annotation for an instance of your model. For a list of supported types, see the [asyncpg docs](https://magicstack.github.io/asyncpg/current/usage.html#type-conversion).
- `name`: Specifies the name of the column. This (currently) has to match the name of the field on the class as well.
- `pk`: Specifies whether this is the primary key. This is used for the `update_one` convenience function.
- `autogen`: Specifies whether Postgres will automatically generate/update the value of this field, e.g. `SERIAL` for ids or `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` for `created_at` or `updated_at` type fields.

## Basic queries

`p3orm.table.Table` provides the following convenience methods for executing queries with basic criteria.

* `Table.fetch_one` will raise a `MultipleResultsReturned` or `NoResultsReturned` if exactly one result isn't returned.
* `Table.fetch_first` will return the first result from a query or `None`.
* `Table.fetch_all` will return a list of results (or an empty list) of a query.
* `Table.insert_one` will insert exactly one model.
* `Table.insert_many` will insert multiple models with a performant bulk insert query.
* `Table.update_one` will accept a single model and update it based on its primary key.
* `Table.delete_where` will delete and return all rows that match a criterion.

All of the above methods use parameterized queries under the hood to protect against SQL injections.

### Creating
```python
inserted_result = await Thing.insert_one(Thing(name="thing 1"))

to_insert = [Thing(name="thing 2"), Thing(name="thing 3")]

inserted_results = await Thing.insert_many(to_insert)
```

Note that we didn't specify the `id` or `created_at` fields. Those are autogenerated by Postgres, so we let the database do the work. We also didn't explicitly specify whether the fields are nullable or not. Again, we offload all validation to the database as the source of truth, and only specify the `Optional` type for local type checking and intellisense. It is best practice to discard locally created models after they've been inserted and replace them with the returned set as they will contain all the database-generated and validated field values.

### Retrieving
```python
everything = await Thing.fetch_all()

filtered = await Thing.fetch_all(Thing.id > 2)

first = await Thing.fetch_first(Thing.id > 2)

one = await Thing.fetch_one(Thing.id == 1)
```

### Updating
```python

thing = await Thing.fetch_one(Thing.id == 2)

thing.name = "Changed"

updated_thing = await Thing.update_one(thing)
```

It is best practice to discard the local model after an update and replace it with the updated result as it will contain any database-updated fields.


### Deleting
```python
deleted_things = await Thing.delete_where(Thing.id > 10)
```
`Table.delete_where` always returns a list of the deleted records.
